Falco initial GEP proposal (#1)
marwinski/gardener: docs/proposals/27-falco-extension.md

---
title: Falco Extension - an extension to deploy and manage Falco in shoot clusters
gep-number: 27
creation-date: 2024-04-16
status: implementable
authors:
- "@marwinski"
- "@lsroe"
reviewers:
---

# GEP-27: Falco Extension - an extension to deploy and manage Falco in shoot clusters

## Table of Contents

- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [References](#references)

## Summary

Falco is a cloud native runtime security tool for Linux operating systems. It
is designed to detect and alert on abnormal behavior and potential security 
threats in real-time [1]. We have deployed it in the Gardener landscape and
can confirm that it is well suited for detecting events that are not ordinary
runtime events. This includes but is not limited to debugging activities,

> changing host configurations, or installing software in containers. Apart from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changing host configurations, or installing software in containers. While these 
events may signify benign debugging activities they are most likely indicating 
malicious behavior.
```

legal debugging activities those types of events most likely indicate malicious
behavior.

Falco is a powerful runtime threat detection engine but comes with limited
means to deploy on many Kubernetes clusters or sophisticated event analysis
and visualization for many clusters. These features are usually provided by
commercial products with may themselves rely on Falco as the detection
engine.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Falco is a powerful runtime threat detection engine but does not in itself provide
means to be deploy in Kubernetes cluster environment.  It neither provides sophisticated 
event analysis and visualization capabilities for the monitoring of multiple Kubernetes cluster 
environments. These features are usually provided by commercial solutions which utilize the 
Falco detection engine. 
```

Author: I would leave that in.

This enhancement proposal describes a consistent way for deploying Falco into
the Gardener infrastructure as well as into shoot clusters operated by Gardener
users in a "Gardener native" way. This includes managing it, providing Falco
updates and bringing a central infrastucture for viewing and analyzing events.

## Motivation

While we have invested a lot into Gardener security and carry out regular

> penetration tests we don't have a lot of runtime insights into our Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
penetration tests we currently do not have the ability to precisely monitor runtime behaviours within our Kubernetes
```

Author: re-phrased in a different way

clusters unless we install 3rd party commercial tools. This includes but is

> not limited to security breaches through misconfigurations or 0day 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not limited to security breaches through misconfigurations or 0-day 
```

vulnerabilities.

We are planning to close this gap by deploying the Falco runtime security
tool.

### Goals

- Deploy Falco into the Gardener infrastructure.
- Allow Gardener users to deploy Falco into their shoot clusters by adding a
  configuration into their shoot manifests.
- View and analyze Falco events in the Gardener dashboard.
- Deploy an optimized ruleset for Gardener managed Kubernetes clusters based 
  on the Falco rules [5]. Optionally allow deployment of incubating-, and
  sandbox rules as well as custom rules.
- Offer multiple Falco versions to users including options for manual- and 
  automated updates.
- Allow users to simply turn on Falco in their clusters with a reasonable 
  default configuration as well as allow power users to fine tune the 
  configuration (rules, plug-ins)

### Non-Goals

We do not compete with commercial products. While we have plans to develop
Falco plugins, we will not provide features such as image-, or malware scanning
that is provided by commercial vendors.

## Proposal

We are planning to provide a Gardener extension that deploys Falco and 

> Falcosidekick into shoot clusters. All events that are generated by Falco are

Reviewer: maybe a super short description if what the sidekick actually is

, Falco's own event forwarding daemon,

This will correspond to the following configuration which will be reflected
in the shoot manifest:

```
  - providerConfig:
      apiVersion: falco.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
      kind: FalcoServiceConfig
      falcoVersion: <latest Falco version marked as "supported"
      gardenerManaged:
        enabled: true
        useFalcoIncubatingRules: false
        useFalcoSandboxRules: false
    type: shoot-falco-service
```

Falco versions are maintained by the extension in the same way operating
system-, and Kubernetes versions are maintained by Gardener. If no 
version is specified the Falco extension will select the currently supported
version.

There are two methods for managing rules and plugins: either let Gardener 
manage the ruleset by setting `.gardenerManaged.enabled` to `true` or have 
the configuration manged by `falcoctl`.

Custom rules can be stored in a ConfigMap and applied to the same project
as the cluster. The ConfigMap must be configured as a resource in the cluster
as described in [6]:

```
  resources:
  - name: customRules
    resourceRef:
      apiVersion: v1
      kind: ConfigMap
      name: my-custom-rules
```

> Events that are generated by Falco are forwarded to Falcosidekick that is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Events that are generated by Falco are forwarded to Falcosidekick which is 
```

to send events to a central location. The Falco extension issues JWT
tokens containing the cluster identity.

As an alternative users can opt to send events to a custom location by
defining a `customWebhook` key and configuration. In this case no events 
will be forwarded to the default event ingestors, events will not be 
visible in the Gardener dashboard, and there will be no alerting.

#### Falco Versioning

#### Falco Event Ingestor

The Falco event ingestor receives Falco events from Falcosidekick, verifies
the JWT token as well as the event body and stores it into an event store
(currently a Postgres database). Due to receiving events from potentially 
thousands of cluster the Falco event ingestor must be highly scalable as
well as to provide additional hardening including the following checks:

- event rate limiting based on cluster identities
- strict validation of events

The implementation of the event store is deliberately not specified in this
enhancement proposal. There are however a number of requirements toward the
event store:

- the event store must be able to store events generated from a whole Gardener 

>   landscape with potentially thousands of clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  landscape with potentially thousands of clusters
```
